# Exploring CoArch with the mystory Sample

## Purpose

This sample illustrates the process of using a coordinated set of prompts to help an author write a short story.

The prompts help the author with brainstorming, developing characters, developing a plotline, and eventually writing the story.  The current output is very rudimentary but with more effort, it may be possible to use tools like this to help authors create compelling and finely crafted stories.

## Prompts

There are 7 general prompts in this directory that are intended to capture different aspects of story writing and review.

The story starts with the user writing a framing of the kind of story they want, which is captured in the file ```FictionAI.coarch.md``` (more generically ```<framing>.coarch.md```).  This file is intended to allow the author to provide details to guide the other elements of story creation.
 
Given this file, the author then uses the following prompts:
- **plot-ideas.prompt.js** - This prompt takes a story framing in a ```<framing>.coarch.md``` file, and generates another file, ```<framing>.plots.coarch.md``` which contains 5 different plot ideas for stories that provide the author with some starting points for their storytelling.
- **plot-compare.prompt.js** - This prompt takes the ```<framing>.plots.coarch.md``` file and compares the plots to the framing and generates a new file, ```<framing>.compare-plots.coarch.md``` which gives an evaluation of the different suggested plots along a number of different dimensions and makes a recommendation for the best one.

Once the author has chosen a specific plot, they place the details for that plot into ```aidiscovery.coarch.md``` (more generically ```<story>.coarch.md```) and then use the following prompts to develop the story further.
- **character-ideas.prompt.js** - This prompt takes a story framing in a ```<story>.coarch.md``` file, and generates another file, ```<story>.chars.coarch.md``` which expands on the detail of the characters in the story and adds additional characters to enrich the storytelling.
- **plot-developement.prompt.js** - This prompt takes the ```<story>.coarch.md``` file and generates a new file, ```<story>.plotline.coarch.md``` which creates a more detailed plotline for the story.  
- **story-writing.prompt.js** - This prompt takes the ```<story>.coarch.md``` file and generates series of files in the directory (specified in the prompt) that represent the different chapters of the story.  This is the main story generation prompt and it uses all the files generated from the previous prompts.
- **draft-critic.prompt.js** - This prompt takes the ```<story>.coarch.md``` and the story chapters generated by the previous prompt and creates a file that contains the entire story as well as a section that provides a critique of the story.


